Allow permission checks via `@PermissionsAllowed` security annotation (#31345)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-authorize-web-endpoints-reference.adoc

<4> This `/subject/secured` endpoint requires an authenticated user that has been granted the role `User` in production but allows any authenticated user in development mode.

=== Permission annotation

Quarkus also provides the `io.quarkus.security.PermissionsAllowed` annotation that will permit any authenticated user with given permission to access the resource.
The annotation is extension of the common security annotations and there is no relation to configuration permissions defined with the configuration property `quarkus.http.auth.permission`.

.Example of endpoints secured with a `@PermissionsAllowed` annotation

[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.arc.Arc;
import io.vertx.ext.web.RoutingContext;
import jakarta.ws.rs.GET;
import jakarta.ws.rs.POST;
import jakarta.ws.rs.Path;
import jakarta.ws.rs.QueryParam;

import io.quarkus.security.PermissionsAllowed;

import java.security.Permission;
import java.util.Collection;
import java.util.Collections;

@Path("/crud")
public class CRUDResource {

    @PermissionsAllowed("create") <1>

>     @PermissionsAllowed("update")

Reviewer: What is your opinion on `@PermissionAllowed` having an attribute, which by default, will require that at least one of the permissions is allowed, but can be set to enforce that all of them are allowed ?
Supporting more than `@PermissionAllowed` annotation can still be allowed to support some complex variations like:
```
// Either a or b or c is allowed and either d or e or f is allowed
@PermissionsAllowed("a,b,c")
@PermissionsAllowed("d,e,f")
``` 
but for a fairly typical case where 2 permissions must be allowed, one would say something like:
```
@PermissionsAllowed(value= {"d","e","f"}, inclusive=true)
```
or something like that, which can make some difference re the annotation noise if a lot of methods are annotated. We can do it in a follow up PR though if you agree

Author: Done, great idea!

    @POST
    public String createOrUpdate() {
        return "modified";
    }

>     @PermissionsAllowed({"see:detail", "see:all", "admin"}) <2>

Reviewer: What is `see:detail` or rather why such a namespaced/qualified permission is highlighted with `:` ? Is it just whatever the custom permission/autgmentor chooses to name a permission ?
Also a permission named `admin` appears to be a role name (I guess it is not but it might be a bit confusing)

Author: Also, why are there `permission name` and `actions` (not that you asked :-), just for context)? That's because `java.security.Permission` works with permission name and actions, while actions are optional. This fashion is followed by the annotation.

Author: Re-think it - `see` sounds like an action. I'll adjust it.

Author: In terms of meaning (dictionary wise), permission is action, I'm not sure whether the examples are wrong. `admin` must go though.

Author: Done.

Reviewer: @michalvavrik Thanks, thanks for the clarification

    @GET
    @Path("/id/{id}")
    public String getItem(String id) {
        return "item-detail-" + id;
    }

    @PermissionsAllowed(value = "permission-1", permission = CustomPermission.class) <3>
    @GET
    public Collection<String> list(@QueryParam("query-options") String queryOptions) {
        // your business logic comes here
        return Collections.emptySet();
    }

    public static class CustomPermission extends Permission {

        public CustomPermission(String name) {
            super(name);
        }

        @Override
        public boolean implies(Permission permission) {
            var event = Arc.container().instance(RoutingContext.class).get(); <4>
            return "show-first-page".equals(event.request().params().get("query-options"));
        }

        ...
    }
}
----
<1> Resource method `createOrUpdate` is only accessible by user with both `create` and `update` permissions.

> The `@PermissionsAllowed` is repeatable and all annotation instances are conjuncts.

Reviewer: Same here about `conjuncts`, some users, including myself, might be a bit rusty on the computer science/mathematics terminology :-)

> <2> User is granted access to `getItem` if he possess either `read` permission or `see` permission and one of actions (`all`, `detail`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> Access is granted to `getItem` if `SecurityIdentity` has either `read` or `see` permission and one of actions (`all`, `detail`).
```

> Relation between permissions specified through `PermissionsAllowed#value` is disjunctive.

Reviewer: Please consider either dropping this clarification (I'm not sure there are any expectations to the opposite) or replacing `disjunctive` with a simpler expression, I thought I knew what was meant but I still Googled to make sure it was the case :-)

<3> You can use any `java.security.Permission` implementation of your choice.
By default, string-based permission is performed by the `io.quarkus.security.StringPermission`.
<4> Permissions are not beans, therefore only way to obtain bean instances is programmatically via the `Arc.container()`.

CAUTION: If you plan to use the `@PermissionsAllowed` on the IO thread, review the information in xref:security-proactive-authentication-concept.adoc[Proactive Authentication].
NOTE: The `@PermissionsAllowed` is not repeatable on class-level due to limitations of Quarkus interceptors.
Please find well-argued explanation in the xref:cdi-reference.adoc#repeatable-interceptor-bindings[Repeatable interceptor bindings] section of the CDI reference.

On CDI beans, it is also possible to take custom `java.security.Permission` much further.
Let's image that in your application, you have following service:

[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.security.PermissionsAllowed;
import io.smallrye.mutiny.Uni;
import jakarta.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;

import java.security.Permission;
import java.util.Objects;

@ApplicationScoped
public class GreetingsService {

>     @PermissionsAllowed(value = "ignored", permission = HelloPermission.class) <1>

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what is happening here, use case, please clarify

Author: @sberyozkin 
Well, naturally if you are not sure, I'll have to clarify it in docs (extend example etc.). But till then, there is explanation:

```Java
   @PermissionsAllowed(value = "ignored", permission = HelloPermission.class, params = "greetings")
```
you say:

- permission name is "ignored" (that's a name, you can use "whatever" etc.)
- use HelloPermission class to perform permission checks
- use say method's formal parameter 'greetings' ( `public HelloPermission(String name, String[] actions, String greetings`) should be passed to the Permission constructor like this:
```Java
var svc = new GreetinsService();
svc.greetings(1, null, "hello");
var perm = new HelloPermission("ignored", null, "hello");
```
This way, you can allow access to the method based on values with which the method was invoked. It was suggested here by Stuart https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/10988#issuecomment-902230311, and I remember using something similar in Spring (however they use AOP, imo our interceptors are more effective).

I also thought it was nicely explained here https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus-security/blob/33ba33ab7113c36dca8e14fc4802ea92e65f3940/src/main/java/io/quarkus/security/PermissionsAllowed.java#L186

Please give me a hint which part wasn't clear from docs as I don't know how to extend example (which part is unclear). Thank you, that will help me.

Author: Sorry @sberyozkin , this answer actually belongs to the comment right below (where params are not autodetected).

Author: As for this specific example, there is one difference - you have single parameter with data type String and you can see `HelloPermission` constructor accepts a `String`, so you don't have to (but you still can) give Quarkus hint which parameter should be passed to the constructor.

Author: btw using `ignored` may seem weird, but `java.security.Permission` has required permission name, it felt weird to allow it to be null. It smells like a hack to me.

Author: As for use case of passing parameters of the invoked method to the security annotation - I don't have any statistics around the world, but in the company I used to work, I saw it countless times. In my eyes, it's pretty cool capability.

Reviewer: I can see why it can be interesting to offload this parameter validation to some custom handler, but it feels to me the idea of using permissions is overloaded here, with `HelloPermission` example, what does it have to do with the authorization control, it looks like a parameter validator.

I'm not sure why the use of `PermissionsAllowed` is needed at all, given that here we don't care about the permission name,  where we put whatever name we want, just so that a custom permission class can verify this parameter without actually checking the permission name and action, instead of using the tools dedicated to the verification of parameters such as Hibernate Validation, or custom JAX-RS filter which can be bound to the given method.

Your example with the Workday evaluator is somewhat different there we check 3 things: permission name, action and an extra property so at least there I can imagine that this extra property check might represent an extra authorization check.

I think this is what you should highlight in docs that this extra property check, in addition to the regular permission allowed check related to the permission name/action, gives an extra authorization capability.

Having a HelloPermission example, with `any` permission name, is confusing IMHO. Please consider showing your workday test example here instead

Reviewer: Hey Michal, I think I have an idea how to express my doubt more precisely, Permission is a function of some mapping from the authenticated identity,  and it can not work with this Hello Permission example, thanks

Author: @sberyozkin now I understand. I provided entirely new example, let see if it is better. I'll resolve this conversation as I think we should start from scratch.

    public Uni<String> greetings(int index, Object obj, String hello) {
        return Uni.createFrom().item("Welcome!");
    }

>     @PermissionsAllowed(value = "ignored", permission = HelloPermission.class, params = "greetings") <2>

Reviewer: Same question as above

Author: This method differs from above in one things - there are 2 strings, what if you want to pass a String to the Permission constructor and it should be just a second one? So you use parameter name to hint Quarkus which parameter should be passed.

            super(name);
            this.pass = "hello".equals(greetings);
        }

        @Override
        public boolean implies(Permission permission) {
            return pass;
        }

        ...
    }

}
----
<1> Formal parameter `hello` is identified as the first `String` parameter and passed to `HelloPermission`.
However this option comes with a price, as the `HelloPermission` must be instantiated every single time `greetings` method is invoked.
<2> Here, the first `String` parameter is `farewell`, therefore we marked `greetings` parameter explicitly via `PermissionsAllowed#params`.
Please note that both constructor and annotated method must have parameter `greetings`, otherwise validation will fail.
<3> There must be exactly one constructor of a custom `Permission` class, also first parameter is always considered a permission name (must be `String`).
Optionally, Quarkus may pass Permission actions to the constructor. Just declare the second parameter as `String[]`.

CAUTION: Passing method parameters to a custom `Permission` constructor is not supported on RESTEasy Reactive endpoints,
because there, security checks are done before serialization.

> Currently, there is only one way to add permissions, and that is xref:security-customization.adoc#security-identity-customization[Security Identity Customization].

Reviewer: Hey @michalvavrik This is a great PR and indeed as you explained earlier more iterations may follow, but it does feel to me that there should be something ready out of the box, for this feature be useful without having to create custom security augmentors.
Can we think of some obvious candidates ? Example, start from extending HTTP security policy configuration to support mapping between roles and list of permissions ? (ex, admin role can write, read while user role can read only, etc) - that would work for all the security extensions.

In the next steps we can handle OIDC scopes etc

Author: Thanks @sberyozkin . Well, I absolutely agree, but it will add complexity to this PR. I'd suggest that week after this PR is merged (whenever it will be in the future), I'll have prepared PR for https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/12219.

I'm happy to start extending HTTP security policy configuration in this PR, but please confirm you don't mind there will be more changes :-) I'd prefer to do it afterwards.

Reviewer: @michalvavrik You are right, makes sense to do it in the next PR and let the current PR code settle for a bit in meantime

    @Override
    public Uni<SecurityIdentity> augment(SecurityIdentity identity, AuthenticationRequestContext context) {
        if (identity.isAnonymous()) {
            return Uni.createFrom().item(identity);
        }
        return Uni.createFrom().item(build(identity));
    }

    SecurityIdentity build(SecurityIdentity identity) {
        QuarkusSecurityIdentity.Builder builder = QuarkusSecurityIdentity.builder(identity);
        // grant permission 'read' to 'user'
        if ("user".equals(identity.getPrincipal().getName())) {
            builder.addPermissionChecker(createPermission("read")); <1>
        }
        return builder.build();
    }

    private Function<Permission, Uni<Boolean>> createPermission(String permissionName) {
        return new Function<Permission, Uni<Boolean>>() {
            @Override
            public Uni<Boolean> apply(Permission requiredPermission) {
                final var possessedPermission = new StringPermission(permissionName);
                return Uni.createFrom().item(possessedPermission.implies(requiredPermission)); <2>
            }
        };
    }

}
----

> <1> You can add a permission checks via `io.quarkus.security.runtime.QuarkusSecurityIdentity.Builder.addPermissionChecker`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> You can add a permission checker via `io.quarkus.security.runtime.QuarkusSecurityIdentity.Builder.addPermissionChecker`.
```

> <2> The permission check will succeed only if incoming request posses permission `read`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> The permission check will succeed only if incoming request has a `read` permission.
```

> CAUTION: Annotation permissions does not work with the custom xref:security-customization.adoc#jaxrs-security-context[JAX-RS SecurityContext], for there are no permissions in `jakarta.ws.rs.core.SecurityContext`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CAUTION: Annotation permissions do not work with the custom xref:security-customization.adoc#jaxrs-security-context[JAX-RS SecurityContext], for there are no permissions in `jakarta.ws.rs.core.SecurityContext`.
```

<4> You can use any `java.security.Permission` implementation of your choice.
By default, string-based permission is performed by the `io.quarkus.security.StringPermission`.
<5> Permissions are not beans, therefore only way to obtain bean instances is programmatically via the `Arc.container()`.

CAUTION: If you plan to use the `@PermissionsAllowed` on the IO thread, review the information in xref:security-proactive-authentication-concept.adoc[Proactive Authentication].
NOTE: The `@PermissionsAllowed` is not repeatable on class-level due to limitations of Quarkus interceptors.
Please find well-argued explanation in the xref:cdi-reference.adoc#repeatable-interceptor-bindings[Repeatable interceptor bindings] section of the CDI reference.

On CDI beans, it is also possible to take custom `java.security.Permission` much further.
Let's image that in your application, you have following service:

[source,java]
----
import io.quarkus.security.PermissionsAllowed;
import io.smallrye.mutiny.Uni;
import jakarta.enterprise.context.ApplicationScoped;

import java.security.Permission;
import java.util.Objects;

@ApplicationScoped
public class ProductOrderService {

>     @PermissionsAllowed(value = "order:member-only", permission = OrderPermission.class) <1>

Reviewer: @michalvavrik Please show in the docs how the implied permission is added (perhaps using the same custom identity augmentor class below), and that would be it, thanks

Author: Sure, thanks, I'll add it tomorrow.

Author: Done.

Author: @sberyozkin

>     public Uni<String> getProduct(CustomerDetail customerDetail, OrderDetail orderDetail) {

Reviewer: @michalvavrik It is an interesting example which shows how an extra `OrderDetail` parameter can complement the permission check, but there is no association of this permission with the authenticated identity.

I do see it now how this CDI PermissionAllowed idea works and I agree it can be useful and quite cool, but I don't see any relationship to the security access control process. It is an application level decision making. Any authenticated user can access this method so how can you restrict it to a member-only order detail specification in this case ?

IMHO it has to be wired a bit differently. Permission should be added as you say below (the only way currently is via `SecurityIdentityAugmentor`, roles as well as OIDC scopes etc support will follow) but this Permission, instead of requiring it to have an extra constructor parameter, is required to have a method `void set(OrderDetails details) `, which will be called by the time `OrderDetails` is available but before `implies(Permission)` is called. 
This way, in `SecurityIdentityAugmentor` (or via future mapings) one can decide if it is a member only request or not.

Author: Hmm, I still believe the concept is right and it's totally relevant what arguments with which method was invoked are useful for security access control process. 

I'll try to reflect what you say, but permission can't have extra methods, it has to be immutable.Let my try again with a new example before we switch a concept from constructors. Also **I'll add some explanations to docs, as I can see it is less intuitive for users than I thought!**

Few points @sberyozkin (but it's my mistake, better documentation and examples are needed, misjudged situation):

- I made mistakes where I used `OrderDetails`, I should use it inside `implies` as there, incoming `Permission` is coming from the `SecurityIdentityAugmentor`
- `SecurityIdentituAugmentor` won't ever be able to set `set(OrderDetails details)` as it has no idea what actual method arguments are. The augmentor creates users permissions, while `OrderDetails details` is created when method is invoked. Then flow is **at least one of permissions created augmentor must imply permission created for method invocation context (the one if order details)**
- I suggest instead of cutting out capabilities, I'll simplify examples and this extra stuff is for users to explore when needed

Reviewer: @michalvavrik As I said, any authenticated user can have this method invoked, so there is no extra access control with this permission unless some mapping is introduced.

> SecurityIdentituAugmentor won't ever be able to set set(OrderDetails details) as it has no idea what actual method arguments are.

I did not propose it, sorry. What I said that `SecurityIdentituAugmentor` or other mapping mechanism (using some request path properties check, or role mapping, etc), associates an `order:admin` Permission with the current identity. Next, when enforcing the PermissionAllowed restriction, the security code, gets `order:admin` Permission from the identity and finds a `set(OrderDetails)` method on this Permission instance (if needed an extra interface like `PermissionProperty<T> { void set(T) }` can be added), before the actual check.

Reviewer: @michalvavrik Let me also clarify, letting users do application level authorization decisions (ex order data is not the ones which are expected - return 403, etc) with the annotation is interesting, I agree, but if we don't care about the permission name/action while checking for the custom property then it should not be done as part of the PermissionsAllowed process, since the users would needs to extends Permission class add some random name in the annotation, follow some conventions (with the constructor or extra method).
So IMHO for this extra property check be done via PermissionAllowed the permission has to be mapped to the identity (starting with the augmentor for now), if it does not matter what the authenticated identity has for this permission be checked then it just should be an independent annotation not part of Quarkus Security (ParameterPermission or something like that, part of Resteasy reactive) which would require a custom class has a single constructor parameter only. 
We can both options supported really, but in scope of this PR please analyze if the permission with an extra check can be bound to the identity as proposed
thanks

Reviewer: We've agreed with @michalvavrik that the docs will need to be updated a bit, what I'm trying to suggest here was already thought about by Michal earlier

    @GET
    @Path("/id/{id}")
    public String getItem(String id) {
        return "item-detail-" + id;
    }

    @PermissionsAllowed(value = "list", permission = CustomPermission.class) <4>
    @GET
    public Collection<String> list(@QueryParam("query-options") String queryOptions) {
        // your business logic comes here
        return Collections.emptySet();
    }

    public static class CustomPermission extends Permission {

        public CustomPermission(String name) {
            super(name);
        }

        @Override
        public boolean implies(Permission permission) {
            var event = Arc.container().instance(RoutingContext.class).get(); <5>
            var publicContent = "public-content".equals(event.request().params().get("query-options"));
            var hasPermission = getName().equals(permission.getName());
            return hasPermission && publicContent;
        }

        ...
    }
}
----
<1> Resource method `createOrUpdate` is only accessible by user with both `create` and `update` permissions.
<2> By default, at least one of the permissions specified through one annotation instance is required.

> You can require all of them by setting `inclusive=true`. Both resource methods `createOrUpdate` has equal authorization requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can require all of them by setting `inclusive=true`. Both resource methods `createOrUpdate` have equal authorization requirements.
```

<3> Access is granted to `getItem` if `SecurityIdentity` has either `read` permission or `see` permission and one of actions (`all`, `detail`).
<4> You can use any `java.security.Permission` implementation of your choice.
By default, string-based permission is performed by the `io.quarkus.security.StringPermission`.

> <5> Permissions are not beans, therefore only way to obtain bean instances is programmatically via the `Arc.container()`.

Reviewer: How does this message correlate with a message below starting with on `CDI beans` ?

Author: This sentence is correct, I think we can't pick up Permissions from CDI as you can (and most like have) many instances of Permission, so we would end up with loads of named beans and I remember named beans are not encouraged in general (Martin wrote it somewhere).

Author: Or we would create tons of subclasses etc. either way we shouldn't go there.

CAUTION: If you plan to use the `@PermissionsAllowed` on the IO thread, review the information in xref:security-proactive-authentication-concept.adoc[Proactive Authentication].
NOTE: The `@PermissionsAllowed` is not repeatable on class-level due to limitations of Quarkus interceptors.
Please find well-argued explanation in the xref:cdi-reference.adoc#repeatable-interceptor-bindings[Repeatable interceptor bindings] section of the CDI reference.

> On CDI beans, it is also possible to take custom `java.security.Permission` much further.

Reviewer: I'm not sure why `Permission` with an extra property is a CDI bean ? It was actually one of the things that confused me earlier.

Author: From comment below I can see you read it differently than I do. I'll rewrite this sentence.

Author: Done, @sberyozkin let see if the sentence is clear now.

> When the `@PermissionsAllowed` annotation is used on CDI beans, it is also possible to pass arguments, with which secured method is invoked, to custom `java.security.Permission` constructor.

Author: @sberyozkin better?

Reviewer: @michalvavrik 

>When the `@PermissionsAllowed` annotation is used on CDI beans

I'm sorry if I'm a bit slow, but can you please type the examples here where `PermissionAllowed` is 1) used on the non-CDI bean 2) on CDI bean

I think you are referring to the JAX-RS endpoint being either CDI or not CDI bean, but would like to clarify

Author: No, I think we absolutely don't understand each other :-/ I'll explain it to you here, problem is that users won't read this PR, therefore I'll need to change docs anyway. Please don't take it personally if I will explain below in detail something that is clear, I do it for clarity :-)

- _In Quarkus all JAX-RS resources are treated as CDI beans_ see https://quarkus.io/guides/resteasy#lifecycle-of-resources, therefore I do not differentiate between JAX-RS endpoints (CDI or not)
- I use sentence _When the `@PermissionsAllowed` annotation is used on CDI beans_ and I target absolutely same meaning as here https://quarkus.io/guides/security-authorize-web-endpoints-reference#standard-security-annotations _@RolesAllowed, @DenyAll, @PermitAll on REST endpoints and CDI beans._
  - by _CDI bean_ I understand https://quarkus.io/guides/cdi-reference#lazy_by_default, for example normal scoped bean
  - by _using on_ I mean if you annotate (AKA secure) method with the `@PermissionsAllowed` that could be intercepted (e..g public etc.), you are using the `@PermissionsAllowed`
 - the situation differs from RESTEasy Reactive resources, as there, security checks are not performed by the interceptors (well, technically they are skipped) and security checks run before serialization, therefore we can't provide option to pass method arguments as there are no arguments ready at the moment when security check is done

First documentation example shows Resource with `@PermissionsAllowed`, second example (right below this sentence) shows `@PermissionsAllowed` on CDI bean.

Please feel free to suggest different wording, otherwise I will try again. Thanks!

Author: @sberyozkin ^^^

Author: I updated the documentation. Feel free to return it back to a rewrite. Thank you

Reviewer: @michalvavrik No problems, though, believe it or not,  I have some idea what `using on` means, but in any case, no problems, the message I'm trying to pass to you, as a user, is that indeed, I'm aware, I thought I was aware, that CDI is always active when it comes to supporting JAX-RS resources. And I don't want to read this text as some kind of CDI specification fragment. Those `@RolesAllowed`/etc just work for me as a user on Reactive or Classic, with or without CDI scope annotations, so I'm finding these CDI highlights irrelevant, too low level, for the purpose of describing how either `RolesAllowed` and now `PermissionAllowed` work.

Now that you have updated your example, I don't think `ResourceService` is a valid JAX-RS resource, so please update it. And please think next how a user who may not be CDI savvy, can figure out when a permission with an extra property works and when it does not work (it is not clear to me why Permission with an extra parameter would not work for CRUDResource, because you can't access JAX-RS resource parameter values ? Does it mean if it is not CDI, it should be a RestEasy reactive ServerRestHandler for example that can do ?)

I'm sorry, I don't want to create a big deal here, but IMHO we need to be clear and precise in describing this feature, thanks

Reviewer: OK, I see you explaining it does not work with RestEasy Reactive because the serialization is done after the security checks. In any case, this CDI bean example should show how it is accessed, is this bean injected to another JAX-RS resource or how else an HTTP call will reach it ?
As far as it is not working in Resteasy Reactive, from one hand it is not a big problem, but then from another one it is kind of a big deal, since you consider this be a cool feature and I see and agree it is but it does not work for our recommended REST stack, so can you think how to make it work with RestEasy Reactive ? Have the permission check done after the parameters have been processed ? (Can be done in another PR if agreed)

Author: Now that I understand your point, I can see calling it `ResourceService` was very unfortunate. I pushed updated documentation. In my eyes it's getting better, but keep feedback coming :-)

>  it does not work for our recommended REST stack, 

I agree. It is still useful as even though it doesn't work on controller/cosumer/(whatever we call where Resources are) layer, it works just fine on service layer and despise most examples in our documentation/quickstart don't have it, many bigger projects won't do application logic in the Resource (they do there validation, authN and authZ). I think some tend to secure with annotation even service layer because in bigger project it's hard to tell where the flow goes (that user permission/role is already checked).

> can you think how to make it work with RestEasy Reactive ?

TBH I based all my statements in this area on this PR https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/19598. There are  good arguments to do security checks before anything else (including serialization), please read here https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/issues/16897.  IMO it is rather conceptional thing than technical - I can make it work especially with proactive authentication, but shouldn't. The situation is different on the service layer, as there, you have arguments ready (you are invoking method, no serialization mappers, JAX-RS filters etc.)

Reviewer: @michalvavrik 

The examples looks good, but again, `LibraryService`, how it is accessed over HTTP ? Can you please complement that example with a JAX-RS resource showing to the users how it will be wired ?

Re Resteasy Reactive,

> I agree. It is still useful as even though it doesn't work on controller/cosumer/(whatever we call where Resources are) layer, it works just fine on service layer and despise most examples in our documentation/quickstart don't have it, many bigger projects won't do application logic in the Resource (they do there validation, authN and authZ). 

Sorry, I'm not following it. It either works with Resteasy Reactive frontend JAX-RS resources or not. Are you saying it will work even with Resteasy Reactive if the permission is applied to a CDI bean injected into the RESTeasy resource, I'm keeping guessing.

In general, IMHO, any new feature targeting JAX-RS based deployments, should be prioritized to work in the recommended JAX-RS stack which is Resteasy Reactive otherwise the new feature targeting the legacy JAX-RS stack only would have limited chance for the longer term support and thus the value of introducing such a feature becomes a bit questionable. 

This is why I believe we need to have at least a plan now how to make this new feature (Permission with an extra parameter) work in RestEasy Reactive - it can still be done before the serialization for RestEasy Reactive - but we can say that for  RestEasy Reactive only URI based parameters can be passed (path segment values, query parameters), as well as headers, which you should be able to access with Resteasy Reactive before the deserialization, either from the CDI interceptor or from `ServerRestHandler` or `ContainerRequestFilter`. It will be a reasonable restriction but will ensure RestEasy Reactive users will be able to use this new feature. (Unless it already works indirecrly as per my question above). 

What do you think ?

THanks

Author: Yes, I hear you, and I thank you how much time you already spent explaining this to me, but we don't seem to agree on what CDI beans are (or I misunderstood you again :-/).

> The examples looks good, but again, LibraryService, how it is accessed over HTTP ? Can you please complement that example with a JAX-RS resource showing to the users how it will be wired ?

The situation is identical to the way [RBACBean](https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/main/integration-tests/main/src/main/java/io/quarkus/it/rest/RBACBean.java#L33) is accessed. You can see that [callingTestOnly](https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/main/integration-tests/main/src/main/java/io/quarkus/it/rest/RBACSecuredResource.java#L96) is not secured, while you will never ever receive `callingTesterOnly` unless you have to `tester`. I consider it a proof that there is a use case for securing non-endpoints. If there is such use case, why not to allow users to pass parameters to the Permission too?

Please correct me if I am wrong, but my conclusion from you comment is:

1. Add example that calls `LibraryService`. I'll do that.

2. Have a plan for the RESTEasy Reactive endpoints, or more specifically:

> This is why I believe we need to have at least a plan now how to make this new feature (Permission with an extra parameter) work in RestEasy Reactive - it can still be done before the serialization for RestEasy Reactive - but we can say that for RestEasy Reactive only URI based parameters can be passed (path segment values, query parameters), as well as headers, which you should be able to access with Resteasy Reactive before the deserialization, either from the CDI interceptor or from ServerRestHandler or ContainerRequestFilter. It will be a reasonable restriction but will ensure RestEasy Reactive users will be able to use this new feature. (Unless it already works indirecrly as per my question above).

You are right, I think there is a lot of things that can be done safely, for example query parameters, path params and headers if they are passed to secured resource method as String or primitive type. I need to research it a bit. I'll open issue if this get merged. Right now, it doesn't make sense to open feature request (enhancement) for the feature that is not currenlty part of the Quarkus.

Author: @sberyozkin

Author: I'll wait with docs example for https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/31687 to get merged, so that I don't waste resources.

Author: Done @sberyozkin , `LibraryResource` now contains resource method `updateLibrarySvc` that calls `LibraryService#updateService`. Thank you for pushing back, do you see other possibilities to improve docs?
